This is no ordinary quarry.
It's where the living ones
bury their dead.
Gaza's Bani Suheila, a cemetery
hollowed out by Israeli excavators.
These were all graves.
This was a cemetery.
But the military says
that they were forced to come in here
because they discovered a Hamas
tunnel
running right underneath that cemetery.
But the Israeli military
failed to prove that
stunning claim
during a three hour tour of the area.
They invited us here a week
after we first uncovered
this graveyards,
partial destruction
using satellite imagery.
Part of a CNN investigation
that found 16 cemeteries
in Gaza
damaged or destroyed
by the Israeli military.
This whole area
here is a military compound.
From the mosque over there
underneath the graveyard.
All the way down north and south,
my forces are beginning to try to flank
this area, were fired from this area
again and again and again.
They couldn't understand why.
So that's how you determine
that there was a tunnel here
because you were being fired upon. Yes.
Our journey to investigate
the Israeli military's claims
begins in the rubble
of what they say
was a residential building.
You even just standing
at the mouth of this tunnel,
you can feel the humidity
just like emanating here.
And this is the way that we go in to
what they say
is an extensive tunnel system
in Bani Suhaila.
We descend into a dark, seemingly endless
labyrinth,
just as tight spaces like this
in certain parts of this tunnel.
But then you get here
and you have full head space pretty much
all throughout it, you can see that
there's electricity,
there's telecommunications.
The Israeli military says
that this tunnel system
actually leads to a Hamas command center,
which they say was used by Hamas fighters
to coordinate their attacks.
The Israeli
military says
this is that command center,
multiple rooms equipped
with plumbing and electricity.
Maps like this one lining the walls.
You can see a kitchen here
equipped with a sink,
running water
with the pipes
running through the tunnel wall.
You have a fan plates.
I mean,
you could imagine this being in a house,
but instead it's deep, deep underground.
Where are we right now?
I mean, what's above us?
So we're in the headquarters
of a Hamas commander.
Above us is a cemetery
that I showed you from the outside.
If you look at the satellite
imagery of this cemetery,
there is a wide area
that the military has cleared.
Why is that necessary?
In order to uncover these tunnels?
We have to reach the tunnels.
We have to reach the tunnels
and cover the tunnels.
We have to prevent
from the enemy to flank us.
But there's no way for us to verify
whether we are actually beneath
the graveyard.
General Goldfuss
takes us back out of the tunnel,
but not into the cemetery.
Instead, we leave the same way we came in
before walking back to the enormous hole
where the cemetery once stood.
He's.
Hold on.
Yeah.
We're asking the general
if we can actually see
the shaft to the tunnel,
but the answer is no.
So they go by the machinery,
which I don't want you to,
just to take pictures of
the security muscles.
But what about if we don't film it?
We just look with our eyes
as we might fall in,
the whole thing can collapse.
Well, you have to walk to the edge.
The edge is not secured.
Can collapse, collapses, machinery,
so on.
That's.
It's not something
I'm going to take a risk on. Sorry.
The Israeli military later
provided this drone footage
showing the tunnel shaft
we entered and another one nearby.
CNN geolocated the footage
using this satellite image.
This outline shows
where the cemetery once stood.
And these are the two tunnel entrances.
Clearly outside the graveyard.
As for the tunnel
they say
they found here
where the cemetery once stood.
The military never provided any evidence.